Welcome to the Data Science Hangout. If you're joining for the first time, it's great to meet
you. I'm Rachel, I'm the host of the Hangout. If this is your first Hangout, this is an
open space for the whole data science community to connect and chat about data science leadership,
questions you're facing, what's going on in the world of data science. And so we want
this to be a space where everybody can participate and we can hear from everyone. So there's
three ways you can ask questions. You can always jump in live and just raise your hand
on zoom that seems to be the easiest way. You could also put questions in the zoom chat
and just put a little star there if you want me to ask the question out loud if you're
maybe like in a coffee shop or something. And then we also have a Slido link where you
can ask anonymous questions. And so Tyler or Rob will share that in just a second here.
Just want to reiterate, we love to hear from everyone no matter your level of experience
to or, or the industry that you work in. But I'm so happy to be joined by my co host for
today, Joe Gibson. Joe is a senior project director at the Beaumont Foundation, and former
director of epidemiology at Marion County Public Health Department. And Joe, I'd love
to have you jump in here and introduce yourself and maybe share a little bit about your role
in the foundation.
Sure. So I've been at Beaumont just since December, so it's not that long. We're working
on a really interesting project to develop health centered local data ecosystems that
already exist all over the place. I mean, there's already health data at any location
that gets used by different people for different purposes, but try to develop those so that
they're more focused on equity and anti-racism with a lot of community engagement to guide
the use of that data, especially engagement by communities that are generally marginalized.
So try to focus the use of that data toward identifying structural racism and addressing
issues of structural racism, bring the data more to bear on those issues. So anyway, that's
what I'm doing at Beaumont, and I'm just kind of informatics advisor as well there. But
I've spent 18 years as Indianapolis's epidemiology program director within the Marion County
Public Health Department and been very involved nationally in trying to improve public health
informatics, essentially. A lot of partnership with healthcare informatics. We've got the
Regenstrief Institute here in Indianapolis, which is a real leader in terms of clinical
informatics.
Thanks, Joe, and thanks for all that you're doing in this space, too. I know I actually
was introduced to you by Jennifer, who comes to the Hangout quite a bit, and she had let
me know how you had grown the team from one to 17 epidemiologists back when you worked
together at the Public Health Department, and I'd love to just kind of hear a little
bit about how you did that and your journey in doing so.
A lot of the credit goes to our director. She really values data, and I came in, you
know, I'm just a data geek. There were four people in the group, and I just started organizing
our data sets into a central area, trying to link data together and trying to amass
more data and organize it so we can be very responsive to any sort of data requests that
came through from the director, from all our community partners, all the, in public health,
public health only works for partnerships, so there's all sorts of people in the community
who are concerned with health and are trying to get grants to improve health clinics, you
know, a hunger network, all sorts of groups like that, so we tried to set up systems so
we could really quickly respond to their needs, and so we were able to use mainly SAS, and
then we got into R to organize the data sets and present the data out to the community
and then partner with a lot of other local sort of data-oriented organizations where
we could give them data and they could create interfaces to it as well.
Just over time, just by being valuable, by pulling in more grants, the group slowly grew.
I was there 18 years, so the growth from about four to about 20 was over 18 years.
About half of that was through grants and about half of that was through general fund
from the health department because we were valuable.
That's awesome.
What was that process like of getting people on board to use SAS and then R?
It was interesting.
It's always so hard when you hire somebody to really have a good assessment of their
skills, and we were constantly trying to figure out how to assess skills as we hired people.
You know, we'd have various, you know, at first it was around SAS, and so we had sort
of this question about people's experience and skills in SAS, and we'd ask them very
specific to do specific tasks around SAS, and I remember somebody who did really well
in the quiz but turned out not to just sort of have a mind for doing the programming,
and other folks who didn't especially do well on those quizzes and just grokked the program
and were able to do amazing things.
So never really cracked that nut, but always had a lot of support within the group, so
we tried to create a really open environment where people were expected to ask for help
from other people, that nobody was, working on your own was not a good thing.
We had to balance that with some people just wanting to sort of, learning by discovering
themselves, but I really tried to push people to ask questions, and we set up systems where
everybody's code got reviewed by somebody else in the group, which was, in part it was
a quality check, but more it probably provided value by helping people see different approaches
to coding.
So if somebody took one approach and somebody else comes in, they go, oh, you know, I'm
learning something from your code, or they're looking at code that could be improved and
they're teaching somebody how to improve it.
So just a validation process we had for any work products being produced, the code had
to be audited, we called it a code audit, by somebody else.
That's been, that was a really good learning tool within the group to bring people along
in their programming.
And then we've tried to have an environment where people could just go, like, encourage
people to innovate and take chances and create things, and it's, you know, it was okay to
make mistakes, but it wasn't okay not to try things.
It sounds like a great culture on the team, just being able to go ask everyone questions
too, and I wonder how that differs with being in person and being able to work together
versus now, like, working virtually too, or work some people in different locations.
There are good and bad things about it, but in Net, I think we actually were more effective
when we went virtual.
We used WebEx teams for, you know, chat, but, you know, everybody's got some sort of chat
tool.
And that actually increased a lot of the interactions that we had with people, because it was so
easy to quickly send a message to somebody else about something.
So, in Net, it was kind of a good thing.
There's still a lot of challenges in sort of establishing the relationships, especially
when you hire new people, and it was all virtual to really make somebody feel like they're
part of a team, you know, we could have lunches together, which was always the highlight of
the day.
Yeah.
Sometimes I struggle with knowing, like, if it's, when it's okay to ask people questions,
like, virtually, like, through Slack, because I feel like I'm just, like, I don't know,
interrupting people, which I am, but, or knowing what's the best way to do that too.
Yeah, we had a couple of discussions in our staff meetings around that.
What will be our protocol?
What's acceptable?
What's not acceptable?
To try to encourage a reasonable amount of communication without people feeling imposed
upon.
So, we set some standards there.
I see there's an anonymous question that came in that says, did you have to deal with any
mistrust of open source tools when switching from SaaS to R?
Not really.
We, we had a lot of autonomy in terms of what tools we decided to use.
So yeah, IT really didn't challenge that much.
I would say no.
I might dig into this a bit deeper, because I was just on a call yesterday with three
people who were having struggles with convincing IT or just, like, bringing open source tools
to IT.
How did you introduce it to them?
We just asked for it.
I mean, but this was, this is only, we only got heavily into R.
We got very heavily into R during the COVID pandemic, just early on in that, because the
visualization interface was just a lot easier for us to work with in SaaS and to expand
upon.
But we'd started dabbling in R just, just like five or seven years ago.
And by that point, our IT group, which is a great, great group, really a lot of forward
thinking people in it, was pretty open already to open source, you know.
So it wasn't, there really wasn't a lot of questions.
They just, we said, this is something we need.
They said, okay, set it up.
They weren't happy.
They wanted, they wanted to stay on Windows systems.
So, you know, we didn't get to use some of the Linux stuff, which might have made some
things easier, except that they just wanted one OS to maintain.
Yeah.
Well, I hope everybody has that, that good of an experience too.
We had a great IT group.
We were, we're very fortunate.
That's great.
Does anybody have questions about that?
Or is like experiencing this right now?
Rachel, I, I can chat about that, but I don't want to monopolize anything.
We're going through it constantly and we're in our, yeah.
So like, I, I feel the pain of where the question has come from.
I've had it in many places and we're doing it now.
And it just, tomorrow I have a architectural review board.
Why are you considering using R for pipelines into GCP?
Just like those questions because IT don't understand, right?
Like how is a stats language a thing to do stuff with data pipelines?
There's a lot of education.
And like people think of R, sorry if I say this, but sorry, not sorry.
It's 1985 R.
Well, it's moved on a little bit since I know the language.
It was created in the early nineties, but like they think of it as that timeframe.
It's not the same anymore.
Yeah.
It sounds like it can be so different across the board, depending on
the industry that you're in or just the company itself.
Javier, I see you had your hand raised too.
If you want to jump in.
Yeah, I was just going to add at, at my last company,
this was like a fairly regular conversation
because there was a cohort of kind of your classical statisticians
that were just very comfortable doing their work in SAS.
And we got around that.
I mean, they still use SAS to a certain extent,
but having like very tailored walkthroughs of things you can do
with R for like very specific teams.
So like, Hey, let's look at your workflow right now
and let's see how we could do this in R.
That always seemed to really impress,
especially when you kind of wrapped it around R Markdown
or something to like, you know, very quickly and cleanly present your data.
So, yeah, I think just having these one-on-one
kind of smaller trainings with these groups of SAS users,
like here, here's how you do it in SAS.
Let me show you how you could do it in R.
I think that goes a long way.
Definitely.
We're trying to get people into R.
We did some of that stuff as well.
I was just spotting whether people would pick up on it.
Each of our ethies is pretty independent in their programming.
I mean, we have those code outs and stuff,
but in terms of their assignments,
they can choose what they want to use for what they're doing.
And it was hard to get people to dig in to a new system.
Because, you know, it's easy to use what you know.
But once we did, some people really took to it.
On that topic too, I see, Ethan, you just asked a question as well
about when you have people using different tools.
Do you want to jump in?
Yeah, so I just want to ask that within your team,
you mentioned that people use both SAS and R.
Do you have situations where some people are really into SAS
and people are really into R?
How do you manage considering you're still code reviewing each other?
Because this is speaking from my experience,
and I have colleagues, we use not SAS, but SPSS.
But we have people who have 10, 20 years of experience doing SPSS,
and it's difficult to teach old dog new tricks.
So it's difficult to get people to switch on to new stuff.
Yeah, and that would come down to who you choose to do your code review.
So we had a system where you kind of rotate through everybody.
But if it's going to be some complicated piece of R,
then you've got to, there's just a limited number of people
that are going to do it.
Same with SAS.
I mean, we didn't have people use SAS,
but we didn't have a whole lot of people who were super experts in SAS.
So it just came down to who was going to be doing the code review there.
Again, though, it was a great opportunity for discovery
and for people to see what was possible.
So I think, again, about COVID, about the, we created a dashboard,
which I wouldn't, I brag about how great the functionality was
and how it looked, but we're not, we weren't expert enough
to actually create a dashboard that would load quickly.
So it takes like 30 seconds to load, and then it's amazing.
But when people saw what was possible, it would get them excited.
And then if you could show them how simple it was
to add a new graph or something, that could get them engaged as well.
I see there was another anonymous question too,
that was, can Joe and or other people on the call too,
give an example or two of guidelines they have as far as,
sorry, just trying to read this question,
as far as questions using chat now that we are virtual, was that helpful?
And if anyone has other context to add to that question,
please put it in the chat too.
But I think it's just around like guidelines that you mentioned
for like slacking people with questions now that we're all virtual.
Right, and just to, if I can, I'll try to remember what our guidelines were,
but they were essentially first text somebody, don't call them,
don't do a voice call, first text them to see if they're available.
And then do a voice call and you call them if they don't respond,
depending on the urgency or not.
And we'd use email for anything that needs to have a long-term record,
you have to, you do an email,
because that's the only place that we have long-term records.
But to prefer for quick communication to use a Slack chat
and or whatever, a WebEx chat.
And that was to be used at any time.
And people should at least acknowledge,
at least respond when they've seen it,
so you know that somebody's seen it.
That was about the extent of our guidance as I remember it.
Yeah, we've been talking about it a lot here at our studio too.
Like when you put a message into a channel that has a bunch of people,
like everybody then starts to like try and answer the question
instead of if it's just like targeted at one person
or the specific people that need to see it.
So we're working on that now.
That was another mistake I made early in the pandemic
was when we switched to starting using WebEx chat.
I said, okay, there's a bunch of joke.
And I was like, okay, well, let's use this channel to get work done.
And then after about a month, I was like, boy, that was a mistake.
We got to have a channel where we're talking to each other.
We're all remote.
We got to have some social interaction here.
Yeah.
Angela, I think you're going to have a question.
Angela, I see you had asked a question in the chat earlier
about using RStudio Cloud.
But I'm curious to just hear some more context of how you might use it.
Yeah, so I should probably do a little bit of an introduction.
Thanks for the welcomingness to like whatever scale
or whatever amount of work we do with this.
So I am the Water Resources Planner for Penobscot Indian Nation
in what is Central Maine.
And so we've been using R for a long time to do a variety of things.
But I also work with a group, a tribal exchange network group,
which we just deal with tribe.
We help tribes all across the country doing environmental monitoring,
help process their data.
And the reason I asked about RStudio Cloud is for a variety of reasons.
Anytime we do training, it's a real hassle to get everybody set up.
And there's inevitably problems in any session.
And then when people go back, frankly,
just what you guys were talking about, IT issues,
it can just be such a pain.
And I just didn't know if anybody had any experience.
I haven't looked into it enough,
whether you can have data hosted locally and use RStudio to ingest it
or whether your data has to be online.
I mean, there's so many questions,
but I really feel like it might be a solution for a lot of tribes.
Mind you, we have to have internet connection,
which is not always the case, especially up in Alaska.
But I guess I'm trying to figure out how we can help train people,
but also how we can help have people something easier when they go home
that they don't have to call us up and go,
all right, this isn't working.
So any thoughts would be great.
I know, oh, there you go.
Just say we didn't use RStudio Cloud,
but we've used a lot of online trainings that are fairly self-contained
that have been really useful.
Just, you know, R Markdown stuff and with available data sets
that people are just important and use on their own systems.
There's a lot of webinars that I can share with you, Angela,
about getting started with RStudio Cloud
if you do want to try it out too
for other people that have used it for trainings.
But I know that's like a huge benefit
is that everybody has the environment already set up
with the packages that they need.
So if it's someone brand new to using R,
they don't kind of get stuck in,
how do I even install this thing?
Yeah, that's what we're running into.
So if you could send me stuff, that would be great, Rachel.
That's really the biggest problem is most of the folks,
not everybody, but most of the folks
we are training and working with haven't done much coding at all.
And so they're really starting off in the beginning.
And I love R.
My boss has actually asked if maybe I would get R
to make a cup of coffee for me someday.
So I've told him that that's my goal.
But not everybody has that level of addiction, I guess.
So it really can be almost like,
oh, I don't want to use R
because I can't deal with the complications.
And I'm interested.
I can't remember who it was that said,
I think it was Brian that said,
you have some hacks for installing
and if you don't have administrative privileges.
That's the first level.
And then all the other upgrading versions of R,
it just can be a little bit daunting.
So thanks.
Yeah, definitely.
Thanks for the question.
And Mike, I might put you on the spot here
because it sounds like you have experience doing that.
I see you put, it's brilliant for training.
Yeah, so I've used it internally
for doing training with colleagues.
As you say, even with the best will in the world
and a lot of lead time,
if you rely on individuals installing R
and installing packages,
you're going to get a whole mess of different versions,
different package versions, different package sets.
Guaranteed, you'll spend half of the training time
ironing out why this isn't working for a certain individual
because who knows what.
Whereas if you pop open RStudio Cloud,
as you're saying, Rachel,
you can set it up so that you guarantee
everyone's got the same packages, versions, sets,
ready to go and it just cuts out that hole.
Now, why are you seeing this not working for you?
I have to say that we had a few issues with it
when I was being a classroom assistant
in the tidyverse training at RStudio conference in 2020.
I think that was almost a glitch.
Something in behind the scenes wasn't working
just as it should on that occasion.
So it was causing a little bit of glitchiness.
But even then, it's by far the easiest way
of just ensuring that everyone's seeing the same things
and working off the same basis.
Awesome.
On that topic of training too,
I see there was anonymous question.
What are a few starter packages or skills
for teams that are transitioning languages?
And I think, Joe, this might even,
this might be a bit on SAS to R too.
Yeah, we, so we had an epigroup,
we had whatever, 15, yeah,
the number of people in varied,
but we had good control over that environment.
And so we had everybody installing the same version.
And we really pushed everyone
to be using tidyverse packages as much as possible.
Because my big concern with R
is that there are so many packages.
If we've got people doing code audits for each other,
I don't want to have everyone have to learn
everyone else's idiosyncratic favorite package.
So we tried to have a lot of push
toward using the same set of packages.
And tidyverse is really nice and comprehensive and such.
And we're into the graphics a lot as well.
So a lot of ggplot2 code.
And so, I don't know, that's how we dealt with the package
and the different environment issue.
And again, it was just one group.
So we're mainly just training that.
We worked with the state health department
to get them trained in R too.
And we kind of, and they helped us.
And we did some sharing there.
In terms of the transition from SAS though,
I was, we never really had a wonderful training solution.
We had, we just had people from the group
put together trainings and present it
or find trainings online and present those to the group.
And again, it was, here's an example
of how you do it in SAS.
Here's how you do it in R.
Books that showed that sort of thing.
There's people going through examples
or the one-on-one code audit kind of trainings that we did.
No great solutions there from us.
Thanks, Joe.
There's a few other anonymous questions too,
but again, feel free to jump in live into the conversation
if you want to just raise your hand on Zoom too.
But one of the questions was,
how do you manage a team
where there are different preferences for languages?
So we stayed very organized in our code.
And any work product we got produced
had to have a lot of language.
So any work product that we got produced
had to have code.
It was archived.
It went into a repository and it got changed.
That changes when it's a repository.
So we had a lot of controls
so we could always do what I call a data audit.
Any work product that we produced
over the 18 years I was there,
you could take that work product,
there'd be an identifier on it
and you could track that back to the code
that produced that data thing.
So if there's a problem with it,
we can figure out what the problem was.
Or if you wanted to reproduce it,
you could find the source code
and you could update that
and use that code again.
So I've lost track of the question.
I'm sorry.
It was just around managing the team
where there's different preferences.
So we built this code library
that had a foundation
and sort of evolving code
for different functions that we often did.
By the time I left there,
there were thousands of programs in this library,
but they're tracked in a database
and you could search it
and you could find useful code.
And it didn't really matter if you use SAS or R.
It was just to get the work done.
I mean, I didn't really care.
I mean, I really wanted the group to move toward R.
I was kind of hoping long-term
we could bounce off the SAS
and maybe even get to like
just having a Python R environment
just to get to free programs
that we could share with other public health agencies
and sort of move the whole
public health informatics world forward
by being able to share code more freely
and not be limited by some of the costs involved with SAS.
But I didn't care if people used R or SAS.
And we created code
that would allow people to call R from SAS
or SAS from R
to try to go back between the two.
And we had a lot of model code
for using the two of them together
to take advantage of some of our graphics
and some of the SAS data management.
But we didn't have rules about it.
And we didn't have like an FDA breathing down our necks
to say you have to conform to this or that.
We were free to do whatever
we decided the standards would be.
For sure.
I know something you're especially passionate about
is improving the public health system.
And I'm curious if there's ways
that we as a community can come together
to help do that
or what ideas you have for doing this.
There's some exciting stuff going on
in public health informatics
around R,
around just open source data sharing.
They're kind of one-off initiatives
for the most part.
But there are folks who have GitHub sites
where they're sharing their code.
There are some communities of practice.
There's one around,
they're called syndromic surveillance,
but essentially looking
at emergency department data.
There's a national system
and there's a lot of local systems
that pull in emergency department data
and look at it for emergencies
that are occurring
or suddenly there's a bunch of this disease
or that disease.
We're tracking COVID.
There's all sorts of very useful things
you can do in emergency department data
to get a more real-time picture
of what's going on in your community.
And there's a community of practice around that.
And the community of practice
has a group within it
that's doing a lot of sharing of R code
for analyzing this data
and some kind of standards for it.
And there's a unified national platform
that has some of the data
and they're sharing R code
for going up to that platform
and analyzing your locker of data from that
and sessions about how to,
I mean, so I guess I see the opportunities.
There's exciting stuff going on.
How this community might help
is just participating
in community of practice.
They work because people engage in them.
I mean, you guys have one right here.
So being engaged in a community of practice,
supporting it,
moving into getting very involved
and helping to move things forward,
lead things, take initiative
and really get engaged.
I've got to say my own career really comes,
I am where I am now
because of communities of practice.
I started in public health
back when people wrote with chisels and stones,
but I evolved to where I am now,
which is I'm very involved nationally
in a lot of stuff
because of communities of practice
by it's sort of the duocracy,
the people who do come into power,
you get engaged,
you see what has to happen,
you try to move it forward,
you work with other people
to make things happen
and you build things.
A lot of them fail
and some of them don't work,
but you create a network
that helps improve things.
That's great that you have that community to it.
We've been trying to like start some communities
or help start some communities of practice.
For example, for supply chain,
and I wonder how did they start that
and then move it forward
so that it's actually progressing?
Did you, I don't know,
just interested to hear how it started.
I've been involved in trying
to start communities of practice
that just fizzled and others that didn't.
Some of them take some of the ones,
the big one I think of that fizzled
is because it was sort of attached
to a research initiative that the CDC had.
Suddenly the funding got pulled from it
and so we were sort of the practice engine
or the practice appendage
that was attached
to this sort of research community
or research funded project
and that went away
and so the appendage just sort of faded
and that'll happen.
Life is full of risks
and you invest and sometimes it doesn't pay off.
It's got to be around something
that people care enough to spend time doing.
There's got to be some immediate payoff to people
and I just, in my experience,
I'm thinking about
the National Public Health Association
and work groups that we've had there.
It's got to be something people care about
but you've got to have enough,
you've got to have a couple people
who are spending a lot of their time
thinking about the community
and how to make the community work
and how to engage the community.
I mean, I think Rachel,
you probably have this role
within this group of
how do I do something
that these people care about
and bring them together
so they get value out of the time
so they're willing to come next week
to do this again
and then relationships start to happen
because people start to meet
and talk to each other
and side projects start to build out of that
and some of those fade
and some of those are successful.
There's value that comes out of that
and it can grow
but you really have to have the gardener.
You have to have the person cultivating it
or the several people cultivating it really
to create enough of a payoff
kind of socially
and value in terms of work
that it moves forward
and that only happens
because people take a risk
of investing their time
in it.
Somebody's got to gamble
and put in that effort.
Definitely, that's really helpful, Joe.
I see Vin,
you asked about this community as well
and how you can find community of practice.
Would you want to jump in here?
Or I can read it if you want to add.
Sorry, I'm in a busy area.
No worries, I can read it if you want.
So the question was,
Joe, I'm an epidemiologist
in a local health department using R.
How can I find or join
that community of practice you mentioned
that's sharing code
for public health related data?
Sure, that would,
if you look up the CDC NSSP,
National Syndromic Surveillance Program,
I think it's called,
you should be able to,
if you search for that
and syndromic surveillance,
you should be able to find
some community of practice.
Jen, who works
at the health department I was at,
maybe you could help get connected
as well.
I think Freshta probably has a connection,
the information for that community,
how to get tied into that.
Awesome.
Yeah, Jen, if you don't mind
sharing that in the chat,
that would be helpful too,
or somebody maybe I already did.
You might also just,
if you look on GitHub for Harold Gill,
H-A-R-O-L-D-G-I-L,
he's got a GitHub site.
He's doing some really great stuff
at Washington State
with a group out there
and he can probably help you
get plugged in,
or go to NACCHO,
the National Association
of City and County Health Officials,
and get involved
in one of the work groups there,
get involved in the EPI group
or the informatics group,
and you can get networked that way
and start making things happen.
N-A-C-C-H-O.
Awesome.
Thank you.
Stephanie, I see you also asked
a great question in the chat
if you want to jump in.
Hi, this is Stephanie, right?
Yes, that's Stephanie.
Oh, yeah, so I was really interested
in how you were talking about, Jo,
the code archive database
you were mentioning,
like tracking everything
because we've done a variety of things
at different places I've worked
and none of them have been
particularly user-friendly.
Yeah, and this is as user-friendly
as we've gotten.
It still requires that each time
that you create a work product
that you log it into this database.
So that's the trick,
making sure that people log it.
So when you start a work project,
you go to the database,
it creates a new ID
for that work project.
You put in a title,
you put in just some basic information
about the purpose of it.
It's not, you know,
there's only like five fields
you have to fill in.
And then you hit a button
that creates a folder for it.
It kind of does some background setup
to make things easier for you.
And then you can store your stuff
within the structure
we've got on our network
that allows people
to find things easily
and is based on that ID.
And then that ID,
you're responsible for that ID
on any work product
or within the name of the files
that you create associated with this.
I'm not being really clear about that,
but essentially the core of it
is there's an ID that's generated
every time you do a work product.
That ID is the first thing
in all the file names
associated with that product.
For the most part,
sometimes you have to put at the end
because you want people,
other people who aren't techies to read it.
And it goes into a folder
that's in a structure
where it makes it easy
to find all that information.
That's kind of the core of our system.
Going back to,
I know we were talking a lot about
using different languages
and how you manage people
using different languages.
But another question was,
how do you handle the situation
when something breaks
and there isn't coverage
across a specific language?
Like if somebody's out on PTO or something.
We have enough people who know SAS and R
that we figured it out.
Part of that goes back
to the documentation
because there should be a record
that explains what this program,
well, you get the work product,
you can track it back to this ID,
to the program.
We have a standard header
that goes in each program
that's supposed to explain
enough about that program
that people should be able
to work their way through it well enough.
I really encourage,
as a light way to put it,
that people put comments in the program
so that other people can read it.
You should, in my group,
if you write a program,
you should think about writing a program
to somebody else in the group.
You're not writing a program
to get something done.
You're writing a program,
yes, to get something done,
but to get it done in a way
where somebody else in the group
can pick that up
and understand what you're doing.
So there's got to be comments
in your program.
And then we've got enough people
who know SAS and R
that we can figure it out
for the most part.
It's a risk.
It's a challenge,
but it hasn't been too bad
because we do require
some standards and documentation.
And again, that's a pain in the neck.
It takes time and investment
and people,
you got to enforce people doing that.
But the code audit
helps with that as well.
Part of the code audit
is making sure that the program's
clear enough and commented enough
so people can understand it.
Oh, Stephanie, if you want,
Stephanie, you can send me an email
or something I can send you.
I actually wrote up
this kind of our process
for doing that,
the indexing of work products
and stuff like that.
That'd be great to maybe share
through our LinkedIn group too.
It's written for Epi groups,
but yeah, you could share.
Okay.
I see, Mike, you had asked,
has anyone developed our snippets
and distributed them across the team?
Yeah.
Siri thought I was asking that question.
We've got, yeah, we've got,
in addition to having
sort of the library of all our code,
we've got some folders
that have handy code snippets
and we just label them for,
you know, here's a good way to do this.
Here's a good way to do that.
You know, so people can go in there
and find useful approaches.
And then the code itself is searchable.
Sorry, are those snippets
actually within the RStudio IDE
or are they in a separate document?
They're separate.
We're just, we just have,
you know, a land file system
with folders on it.
And one of the folders
is useful code and macros,
something like that.
And everybody knows you go there
to look for some tips.
Sort of put tickets.
I mean, I don't know
if people are familiar
with the snippets within the RStudio IDE,
but they're super cool
because you can set up template frameworks
where as you pull in the snippet,
it jumps you to, you know,
what's the next thing
that you need to tailor
for your own situation?
It's essentially like a function,
but it's a more of a kind of open code.
Those are super helpful, Mike.
I didn't even know they existed
until like six months ago.
And I was shocked when I found out about it,
but super helpful.
I have all kinds of snippets
for myself and my team right now.
Yeah, they live in a specific place
within your kind of,
I think it's within app data or something.
So it's not terribly easy
to share them between people.
But if you're in an organization
where you can roll out
an installation or, you know,
configurations like that,
then they're a really helpful thing to know about.
Okay, I'm going to admit
I didn't know that either.
So if you're in the RStudio IDE,
when you start typing a function name
or something, you can use tab to auto-complete.
But you basically give
the little kind of template of code
has its own little name.
And so if you hit tab,
it will auto-suggest
one of the things it will auto-suggest
is either a function or a snippet.
And then if you choose the snippet,
then if it's like a ggplot framework,
then it will say, you know,
what's your data?
What's the aesthetics?
And it kind of just guides you
through filling in the right information.
And so, as I say,
it's almost like a function,
except that it's just helping you.
It's a framework for writing your code.
Cool. I see Yan had asked a question to you, Mike,
to share more on what you did with that.
If you don't mind sharing, like,
maybe some helpful links
or resource you used for it.
Yeah, I think Tatsu has just shared
the code snippets article, which is great.
I haven't used them in Anger.
I think that's, you know, I'd love to,
and I'd love to share that more widely.
And I'd love to share that more widely
with like, you know, folks I work with.
I think the problem that I have
is that sharing them out to other people
is, you know, involves them
having to save the right file
in the right place,
which is always problematic for anybody, it seems.
But you can set up your own,
which is the great thing.
Nice. Yeah.
I was talking about that yesterday
with someone around, like,
data products as well.
So like, if you had a template,
like example, R Markdown or ShinyApp
for something for your company
and making it available for everyone to use.
Well, that's what a package is for, right?
Well, I think like thinking about
like having it published somewhere
that you could just go and pull the sample app.
Let me see if there are other questions
that I didn't see on Slido yet.
Oh, I see, Jen, you had asked a question
in the chat too, if you want to jump in.
Sure. Hey, Joe.
Hey, Jen.
It's good to see you.
I was going to ask,
what's the most important traits
that you look for when you hire?
Like what questions do you ask
to get that information?
Well, so when I hire,
I'm not necessarily hiring a data scientist.
I'm hiring an epidemiologist.
And for an epidemiologist,
I want somebody who, well,
for a worker, I want somebody
who's going to take initiative,
who's going to be able to take the initiative
who's going to be able to work independently
or get to a point
where they can work independently.
Who's got, you know, I don't know.
There's not one.
They're going to have to have good content knowledge.
And yeah, I would love to be able
to have x-ray vision where I can see
that they're kind of like you, Jen,
where they've got this amazing data brain
and they, you know, they go off to this stuff
and they can, they understand, you know,
they just sort of start to intuitively
understand data structures
and how to analyze stuff.
But that's not necessarily essential.
It's really more about people
who are going to take initiative,
be able to work independently
and have some,
have the right knowledge, at least.
I love people with experience,
but usually we end up just
trying people out of school.
So it's at least having sort of a basis of knowledge.
And, well, and it's public health.
So they've got to have the love for public health.
They've got to be invested
in what we're trying to get done.
They've got to have the mission.
How do you interview for that
to know if someone is going to
take the initiative?
We use a process called targeted selection
that I picked up years ago.
I used to work for Eli Lilly, the pharma company.
And they gave me this training
and this interview process.
But, you know, you lay out dimensions
that are important,
and then you have several different teams
at different sessions
ask about those dimensions.
You have several people asking
about each dimension in different,
separately.
So you can combine,
you can discuss afterwards.
We make sure we ask for examples.
We try to really nail people down to saying,
tell me a specific situation
where you've been challenged with this
and what did you do
and what was the result?
As opposed to people saying,
I'm really, I really like doing this.
I'm really good at that.
You know, just abstract talking
and trying to get people down to
talking about really a lot of specifics.
And it's hard, but it's,
I think probably the biggest tool
I've used for making sure,
seeing what people really have
is asking them for specific examples
and asking them.
And it's called the star format.
But you tell me what's the situation
or task you had
what did you do about it?
And what was the result?
That illustrates your ability
to whatever you're interested
in taking initiative
or your investment
in the mission of public health,
whatever that might be.
Thanks, Joe.
I just want to check from the chat too.
If I had missed your question,
feel free to just raise your hand on Zoom too.
But one question I had for you, Joe,
just based on a previous conversation
is we talked a lot, a bit about
like technical skills are important,
but a lot of it is also learning
how to partner with people as well.
I was wondering if you could
chat a little bit about that.
Yeah.
I've worked with people
who have amazing technical ability
and just super great data brains,
great data brains,
but at least at least in my field
in epidemiology,
it's all about producing information
and it's about producing
relevant information.
So you've got to understand the customer.
You've got to understand their situation
and the better you understand
where they're coming from,
what they face day to day,
the easier it is to add value
to what they're doing
by bringing data to bear.
I really see my group
in Marin County as a support group,
as a service group.
We're there to serve other people.
Other people have the,
they know what their problems are.
We need to draw those problems out
and understand what those problems are,
kind of put them into our data language
and then be able to apply data
to those problems to get back
to their issues.
So that's the partnership.
That's the understanding.
You have to be really,
the closer you are to the client,
the better.
We've got some programs
that are really well-funded.
We can have one epi,
like spend most of their time
on, say, HIV.
We've got, Jen spends half,
or she used to?
Yeah.
We have somebody who spends
half of their time with HIV,
with an HIV program.
So they can sit with those people
and really understand
their day-to-day work
and what the issues they face
and see the opportunities
to bring data to bear on that.
So it's around
really getting to know people
so then you can translate
their needs into data needs,
pull the data and translate it,
give it to them.
And create systems where, you know,
it's not just answering
individual questions,
but it's creating systems
where day-to-day,
they can operate more effectively
because you've set a system up
where they get the information
they need as they need it each day.
Great, thank you.
Well, I get to ask you
more questions then
if there aren't other questions
from the audience.
But I'm curious about
your recent move
to the Development Foundation
and how you made that decision
after like moving
into your leadership role
with the county.
There's two things going on.
One is just the whole issue
of equity and racism.
And this being just
a really cool project
to help try to help public health
move along the pathway
of addressing racism
and equity more squarely.
A lot of interest in
integrating more equity-based practices
and how we use data,
what we do with data.
But within public health,
there's a lot of discussion of that,
but we're still trying to figure out
what it is.
And this is an opportunity
to put a lot of focus on figuring out
what that might look like.
And it's been a tremendous learning.
I've had a tremendous amount of learning
over the last several months
working with people who are much more
in the racial equity workspace
and advocacy area
to figure out what it might mean.
I always knew we need to be closer
to the community than we were
at Marion County.
But the closer we were to the community,
and again, this is getting back
to understanding the customer
and understanding what the needs are out there
and being relevant.
The closer we are to them,
the more relevant we're going to be,
the more valuable what we produce
is going to be.
And it's just been underscored
in the last several months
about how important it is
to make the affected communities,
the marginalized communities,
partners in figuring out
what the questions are,
figuring out what the questions are
and what the factors are
you need to pull together
in the information, the data,
to identify, to bring to the surface
the issues like structural racism,
how that's manifesting
so that you can put a spotlight on that
to try to bring about change
and have them help frame the results
in a way that's going to make that change move
because they can frame the results
in a really salient, impactful way,
much more than I'm going to be able to
as an old white guy
working in an epi department
looking at data can do
without their engagement.
So that was a lot of it,
you know, just this opportunity
to be involved in something
that I think is really, really important.
And it's a platform
where I can be a lot more involved
in some of the national discussions
that I was involved with at Marin County,
but now I can have,
that's more central to what I do.
That's amazing, Joe.
Are there things that we can all do
as a community
as we like, I don't know,
bring things back to our own companies
and think about the ways
that we're all operating?
Yeah, there's a lot we can do.
It's really, so much of what I'm recognizing
more and more is
the problem with race,
things that perpetuate racism
and structural racism
are that we don't talk about it,
we ignore it, we don't label it.
And that's not okay
because that allows it to continue.
If we really want to change
what's happening,
we need to talk about white privilege
and about how,
like, again, I'm in public health,
so how a lot of the differences
we see in statistics
rather than just presenting,
okay, there's this difference in white,
in terms of health outcomes,
frame that in the context
of we've got 400 years of history
where this group has been oppressed
in many ways.
We've had, and not just before,
not just until the Civil War,
but there's redlining,
there's all sorts of,
there's the implementation
of like the whatever, World War II,
veterans, the veterans benefits
and such like that.
There's a lot of stuff
that just really left out these communities.
Social security,
when social security was implemented,
it excluded domestic workers
and agricultural workers,
which are white and black
and all different colors,
but most of them were different colors than white.
And so the net effect of that
was to oppress certain groups
much more than other groups.
So bringing that to the surface
when we present results
to frame it in more context
where people can see
the structural racism,
the effects of the structural racism
to push us toward thinking about
how to address those issues.
It's not just a woman lives in a house
that has a lot of asthma triggers.
It's, there's a lot of dust,
there might be cockroaches, whatever.
We go and we can intervene
to improve that house
or move to a different house
and that helps her.
But we need to get back to
why do we have people
living in houses like that?
We need to change the policies
that are allowing
these inequities to occur.
And so it's trying to push back
to more root causes of the issues
that we're trying to deal with.
Brilliant.
And I know we're just
at the top of the hour,
but I'd love to keep
this conversation going.
You have a few more minutes, Joe.
Yes, I do.
Okay, awesome.
Angela, I see you had your hand raised too.
If you want to weigh in.
Yeah, I just wanted to say
such great conversation
that you're having, Joe.
I love to hear that kind of
looking at the source of things.
One of the many things
that we analyze in R
is our fish contaminant data.
So Penobscot Nation
has sustenance fishing rights
reserved in treaties.
And as you can imagine,
many sources of pollution
do not allow that to happen.
Even when fish dams get taken out
and fish come back up from the ocean,
we're finding recent studies
that we're finding
they're even more contaminated
than non-seabed run fish.
So those conversations
about what is causing these problems
are so critical.
So I just really wanted to
commend you for having
that level of conversation.
Yeah, and I'm no expert in it.
I'm just learning on this.
And then again, nobody is.
I mean, you got to give yourself
some space and allow yourself
to make mistakes,
but we got to try in this area
and figure it out.
Exactly, exactly.
I think we have to get comfortable
with being uncomfortable
because it's not easy stuff
and it's not going to be
a simple conversation.
So but commend you for having it.
It's really, really uncomfortable sometimes.
So thanks for doing it.
No, it is for sure.
And on that topic, too,
of like getting uncomfortable
with having these
uncomfortable conversations.
Do you have maybe some suggestions
for us or tips of how we can be
approaches in our own organizations
or maybe maybe see that something's
yeah.
Yeah, I mean, the thing is.
You got to speak up.
You got to give yourself
a little forgiveness
for not always speaking up.
But you got to take some risks
and you got to push it.
It's I don't have the answers.
It's not an easy thing.
And there's not a way
to do it safely, really.
I mean, there's always risk involved.
So I don't know.
I don't know.
You got to find finding finding.
I guess when I look at the folks
who are really doing this a lot,
they've got a large group
around them of allies,
of folks who are allies.
The wrong word in that in that context.
But these are people who
share the mission
and can support each other
as they go forward,
because it's not easy, easy work.
And you need you need people
who are supporting you.
One organization that I know of
in the data world is the AI inclusive.
Or from the I think the founder
of our ladies as well.
And I'm curious if there's other.
Similar organizations, too,
that we could all share with each other.
I just put that one into the chat.
Yeah, there's some really good work
by the Mozilla Foundation around equity.
And well, community engagement
that gets gets into equity.
And I've spent the last several months
just going over the soil area
and doing a lot of research in it.
So there's a lot of organizations.
I don't everything is specially organized,
but I might in a little while,
if you ping me like in a couple weeks,
I might have something
that would be useful to share.
Yeah, that would that would be
really helpful, Joe.
I, I just want to make sure
that I've heard everybody
who had a question
or wanted to jump in, too.
So I'll do another check
to see if there's anything I've missed.
I see Chris is sharing
a link in the chat, too.
Thank you.
I'm going to go ahead and
I do want to.
I think it's so important
that we continue to have
conversations like this as well.
And I know I kind of just came
at the very end of the session here.
So I would love to to dive deeper
into this on future hangouts, too.
But thank you so much, Joe.
If people want to connect with you
or have other questions,
what's the best way to connect?
LinkedIn or Twitter?
No, it's email.
I'm an old guy.
Email is probably the best way.
So I guess I guess
you can share my email.
If you get if people could try to make
clear in the subject line
what it's about,
like maybe it's connected
to the RStudio thing or something.
So I can sort of segregate it
off my other email.
Make sense of it.
OK, great.
I will.
I'll share that with everyone, too.
But also share some of the links
that were mentioned in the chat
and tips on our LinkedIn group
for the hangout.
So if someone from the RStudio team
is on and wants to share that link there,
or I can go and grab it real quick.
I'll put it into the chat,
but every week after the hangout,
so try and share every link
that was mentioned
or a few tips from the featured leader.
But thank you so much for joining us, Joe,
and sharing your experience with us.
Sure, happy to do it.
I'm glad you guys are out there.
It's good to see groups getting together
and learn from each other.
Thank you all for all
the great questions, too.
Have a great rest of the day, everyone.